1. Since May 2019, monthly migrant encounters has skyrocketed, especially after the initial wave of the pandemic in April 2020, breaking an 18 year trend of decreasing monthly migrant encounters. With over 200 thousand encounters reported in November 2022 alone, there are valid reasons for concern (Pew 2023). As US Border Patrol Chief Carla Provost said succintly, “Border security is national security ... and the crisis on our southwest border puts our national security at risk.” This sudden influx of migrants has really put a strain on the Border Patrol and through it our national security. While in the past 4,000 in custody at a time would warrant a crisis, we have recently hit over 20,000 in custody - much greater numbers than we can sustainably hold. Aditionally, resources used to stop drug smugglers or other national security concerns are also being diverted to address the migrant emergency (CBP 2023).

2. The main negatives of declaring a national emergency is the redirected spending and the increased power given to the executive branch under a national emergency. As stated in the National Emergencies Act, when a national emergency is declared that requires use of the armed forces, the Secretary of Defence could undertake military construction projects not previously authorized as long as deemed necessary and within appropriated funds. This would require defunding other existing projects, which due to its related nature under military construction, could also harm national security. One of the large areas including in military construction funding includes family housing and repairing of general deteriorating facilities that through the reallocation of money, would not recieve the required funding. While there are also a wide array of statutes that is available under National Emergency powers, not all will be relevant (Brenan Center). 

3. I think the President should declare a national emergency. Although there has been bad precedent regarding delcaring a national emergency in the southern border, unlike Trump's focus on the wall, construction and funds could go towards patrol headquarters, watch towers, fencing, and much needed processing centers to supplement the current ones that are overwhelmed. Compared to the state of Trump's national emergency, the migrant issue has also gottn much worse, bringing more credence to such declaration. Additionally, in contrast to Trump's situation using the national emergency as a method of bypassing Congress, there is a much better chance at bipartisan support across the board for such declaration especially with the re-emphasis on Title 8 instead of Title 42 (. Through declaring a national emergency, not only could we better address an ongoing crisis efficiently and humanitarianly. 

Work Cited
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2023/01/13/monthly-encounters-with-migrants-at-u-s-mexico-border-remain-near-record-highs/
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/09/world/americas/biden-amlo-mexico-migrants.html
https://www.cbp.gov/frontline/border-crisis-cbp-s-response
https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/guide-emergency-powers-and-their-use
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/02/14/trump-decides-whether-to-sign-border-security-deal-to-avoid-shutdown.html